# Convincing arguments

---

Sri Vallabha Pandian was one of the Pandya kings who ruled over Madurai. One night, when the king went round his capital city, he noticed a man lying on the pyol of a house. He didn’t look like a citizen of the Pandya kingdom. The man told the king that he was from Kasi and was on his way to Rameswaram. Since the man was a scholar, the king asked him to give some advice. The man said, “Since it rains for four months, work hard during the remaining eight months. Save for your old age when you are young. Do what you must now for liberation.”

The king asked his spiritual adviser Selva Nambi what the man’s words meant, said V.S. Karunakarachariar in a discourse. Selva Nambi suggested that a prize be announced to anyone who could satisfactorily answer the king’s questions. A bag of gold coins was tied to a pole. If the bag dropped from the pole when a person finished his arguments, then he was to be considered the one who had given the right answer. Vishnuchitta in Srivilliputtur was serving Lord Vatapatrasayee by making garlands for him. When the people of his town urged him to go and win the gold, he hesitated. But the Lord appeared in his dream and ordered him to go to the Pandya court. When Vishnuchitta spoke in the Pandya court, the Vedas themselves asked him to quote them. He even argued on the basis of that which he had not studied, because the Lord was with him. Through convincing arguments, Vishnuchitta established that the only One who could grant moksha was Lord Narayana. When he did this, the bag of gold dropped down. Vishnuchitta was honoured by the king and came to be known as Periyazhvar.
